---
title: Understanding output tables
author: Ángela Castillo-Gill
date: '2018-11-05'
slug: understanding-output-tables
categories:
  - Journal
tags: 
  - RPart
  - Learning
draft: FALSE
summary: Generalising the Rpart algorithm.
output:
  blogdown::html_page:
    toc: true
    number_sections: true
    toc_depth: 2
  fig_caption: true
editor_options: 
  chunk_output_type: console
---

I've been able to answer quite a few of the questions that I asked before. For example, I don't have to remove outliers because the algorithm is robust to outliers. No centering and scaling needs to be done to the variables. I can leave factors as factors, but the issue with with a lot of levels is that the tree can get quite wide which reduces its interpretability, which is after all, one of the advantages of using binary trees. 
I've also answered what constitutes an improvemment in the branch-splitting algorithm, which is finding a variable that can produce the most homogenous subgroups after a split. 

The `rpart` function has several hyperparameters I would like to really understand before I modify the variables. 
Today I set out to understand these hyperparameters but instead got caught up understanding the, "five additional ingredients" that need be specified to "generalise "extend" the algorithm.
These are: 

a. Splitting criterion, in ANOVA, this is maximising the between-groups sum-of-squares in a simple analysis of variance.

`\(SS_T-(SS_L+SS_R)\)`

Where `\(SS_T\)` is the sum of squares for the node; `\(SS_L\)` is the sum of squares for the left son; and `\(SS_R\)` is the sum of squares for the right son.

b. A summary statistic or vector to describe a node. The first element is considered to be the fitted value. For ANOVA or regression, this the mean of the node. 

c. Error of the node: Variance of `\(Y\)` for ANOVA.

d. The prediction error for a new observation, assigned to the node ($y_{new}-\bar{y}$).

e. Any initalisation parameter. 

I was also trying to understand the output of `printcp()` which shows the complexity parameter in descending order. 

It shows the columns: `cp`, `nsplit`, `rel error`, `Xerror`, and `Xstd`.

- `rel error`: is defined as `\(1-R^2\)`
- `Xerror`: "related to the PRESS statistic". What is the PRESS statistic?
- `Xstd`: related to the cross validation error.

Also, when reading the `rpart` documentation, the authors constantly refer to a surrogate split. Which I'm having a bit of trouble trying to understand. 
